Introductory Blog for Context Management (#56)
ibm-granite-community/granite-agent-cookbook: recipes/ContextManagement/context_management.md

# Context Management for AI Agents

## 1. Introduction: Context Engineering

The context window is an agent's entire working memory. Unlike a human, an agent cannot glance at a whiteboard or flip back through handwritten notes. Every piece of information it needs : task description, tool schemas, conversation history, retrieved documents, prior tool outputs must fit within a fixed token budget, and everything that's in there influences every output.

---

## 2. Anatomy of an Agent's Context

### 2.1 Three Context Layers

**Model Context**

> The live token stream the LLM sees at each call: system prompt, conversation turns, tool definitions, and tool results. This is the only thing that actually influences the model's next output. It is ephemeral by default, reset on every new call unless you explicitly carry it forward. Within a single thread, a thread-scoped memory layer persists the conversation state across LLM calls, automatically replaying it into the next call's context window.

Reviewer: > Within a single thread, a thread-scoped memory layer persists the conversation state across LLM calls, automatically replaying it into the next call's context window.

Not sure if this exists as a default on APIs, but some libraries like LangGraph do this for you under the covers. We should call that out.

**Tool / Store Context**

> State that lives outside the model but can be injected on demand: a [LangGraph state object](https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/concepts/low_level/#state), an in-memory key-value store, a Postgres-backed long-term memory, a vector database. Think of this as the agent's filing cabinet.

Reviewer: Add Skills.md here. They are now an alternative/equivalent to Tools that a model can invoke based on dynamic needs.

**Life-cycle Context**

Everything that persists across agent runs: user preferences, prior task summaries, learned facts. In LangGraph this maps to a [persistent store](https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/concepts/persistence/) that survives thread boundaries.
A common implementation of lifecycle context is a static instruction file `AGENTS.md` committed to the repository and injected into the system prompt at startup. Unlike runtime-accumulated context, it is human-authored and fixed: project conventions, tool rules, and constraints. Since it loads on every call regardless of relevance, it is a fixed token cost that grows silently as the file does.

---

> ## 3. Why Context Management is Hard: The Four Failure Modes

Reviewer: Not in this PR, but as a follow up tech debt would be good to document examples for each of these. Even just to drive the point home.

Author: created this [issue 72](https://github.com/ibm-granite-community/granite-agent-cookbook/issues/72) that can be assigned to me

| Zero infrastructure required | Invisible to the agent, it cannot know what was lost |
| Predictable token budget | Poor fit for tasks requiring long-range coherence |

---

### Strategy 2 — Compaction / Summarization

**Failure mode addressed:** Context Distraction

Instead of silently dropping old messages, compaction uses an LLM to generate a summary of the conversation so far, then replaces the raw history with that summary. The summary becomes the new "base" for future turns. When the window approaches capacity, it compacts, replacing the full history with a structured summary.

> **Note:** Summarization must be done carefully to avoid losing critical information. Treat the compaction model as a first-class component that needs its own evaluation and prompt engineering.

| Advantages | Limitations |
| --- | --- |
| Preserves compressed form of all history | Risk of information loss. Carefully prompt or fine-tune the compaction model |
| Agent sees a coherent narrative, not an abrupt cutoff | Adds latency and cost at compaction time |
| Works well for long-running conversational agents | Use context offloading (Strategy 6) to avoid information loss entirely |

---

> ### Strategy 3 — Dynamic Tool Selection

Reviewer: Can we add a link to Tool Rag Recipe in this repo.

**Failure mode addressed:** Context Confusion

Every tool definition you bind to the LLM consumes tokens and introduces potential confusion. Research from the [RAG-MCP paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03275) found that above 30 tools with overlapping descriptions, tool selection accuracy degrades sharply; above 100 tools, failure is near-certain. The ["Less is More" paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15399) showed Llama 3.1 8B fails a benchmark with 46 tools but succeeds with 19.

The solution: embed all tool descriptions in a vector store and retrieve only the semantically relevant tools at each LLM call. The [RAG-MCP](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03275) team found this yielded up to 3x improvement in tool selection accuracy.

| Advantages | Limitations |
| --- | --- |
| Directly prevents Context Confusion from overlapping tool definitions | Requires maintaining embedded tool index |
| Reduces prompt length and cost per call | Retrieval can miss tools for novel query types |
| Scales to large tool registries (100+ tools) | Adds one embedding lookup per LLM call |

---

> ### Strategy 4 — Context Pruning

Reviewer: Can we add a remark about how this can be done or a link to a resource documenting this? I have not come across this in practise yet.

Reviewer: Please also can you review the spell checker and update spellings file as needed. Thank you

# Context Management for AI Agents

## 1. Introduction: Context Engineering

The context window is an agent's entire working memory. Unlike a human, an agent cannot glance at a whiteboard or flip back through handwritten notes. Every piece of information it needs : task description, tool schemas, conversation history, retrieved documents, prior tool outputs must fit within a fixed token budget, and everything that's in there influences every output.

---

## 2. Anatomy of an Agent's Context

> ### 2.1 Three Context Layers

Reviewer 2: How do things like AGENTS.md fit into this?

Author: Thanks for your comment @bjhargrave , will add how `AGENTS.md`, `SKILLS.md` and todo lists can fit into context management especially in the context of Filesystem for agents.

**Model Context**

The live token stream the LLM sees at each call: system prompt, conversation turns, tool definitions, and tool results. This is the only thing that actually influences the model's next output. It is ephemeral by default, reset on every new call unless you explicitly carry it forward.

**Tool / Store Context**

> State that lives outside the model but can be injected on demand: a LangGraph state object, an in-memory key-value store, a Postgres-backed long-term memory, a vector database. Think of this as the agent's filing cabinet.

Reviewer: Potential for reference links to LangGraph here or at the end.

**Life-cycle Context**

Everything that persists across agent runs: user preferences, prior task summaries, learned facts. In LangGraph this maps to a persistent store that survives thread boundaries.

---

## 3. Why Context Management is Hard: The Four Failure Modes

> > Sources:

Reviewer: Lets keep sources and citations to the end of the doc.

>
> - <https://www.trychroma.com/research/context-rot#needle-in-a-haystack-extension>
> - *Context Rot: How Increasing Input Tokens Impacts LLM Performance*

### Failure Mode 1: Context Poisoning

A hallucination or incorrect inference enters the context and is treated as ground truth on subsequent turns. Because the model's outputs feed back into its own input, the error compounds. The longer the context, the more opportunities for poisoned information to be referenced and reinforced.

### Failure Mode 2: Context Distraction

When context grows so large that the model over-focuses on accumulated history and neglects what it learned during training. The Gemini team observed this directly with their Pokémon-playing agent: beyond roughly 100,000 tokens, the model stopped generating novel plans and started repeating actions from its history. This is not a context window limit, it is a reasoning quality limit that kicks in well before the hard ceiling.

### Failure Mode 3: Context Confusion

> Superfluous or irrelevant information in the context window actively degrades response quality. Chroma's research makes this concrete: even a single distractor : a passage topically related to the question but that doesn't answer it measurably reduces accuracy. Adding four distractors compounds this degradation further. The model feels compelled to use all available context, and irrelevant tokens pull it off target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Superfluous or irrelevant information in the context window actively degrades response quality. Even a single distractor, a passage topically related to the question but that doesn't answer it, can measurably reduces accuracy. Adding multiple distractors compounds this degradation further. The model can feel compelled to use all available context, and irrelevant tokens pull it off target.
```

### Failure Mode 4: Context Clash

Contradictory information accumulates in the context. Tightly coupled multi-agent systems are especially prone to this: if two subagents independently write different sections of a report, the combined output will be incoherent because each made assumptions the other violated. Clash also arises when new tool results contradict earlier ones that are still in the history.

---

## 4. Strategy Overview

> | Strategy | Fixes |

Reviewer: This table breaks the readability of the document a little bit. Maybe we can arrange this differently. Or maybe adding a little introduction that says, in this next section we introduce techniques such as XYZ, to resolve the above noted failure patterns.

**Failure mode addressed:** Context Distraction

The simplest context management strategy: keep only the N most recent messages. When the message list exceeds the limit, the oldest messages are dropped. First-in, first-out.

This directly combats Context Distraction. By capping history length you prevent the context from growing to the point where the model over-focuses on accumulated turns. The trade-off is that information from early in the conversation is permanently lost.

| Advantages | Limitations |
| --- | --- |
| ✅ Trivial to implement | ❌ Permanently discards early context |
| ✅ Zero infrastructure required | ❌ Invisible to the agent, it cannot know what was lost |
| ✅ Predictable token budget | ❌ Poor fit for tasks requiring long-range coherence |

---

### Strategy 2 — Compaction / Summarization

**Failure mode addressed:** Context Distraction

Instead of silently dropping old messages, compaction uses an LLM to generate a summary of the conversation so far, then replaces the raw history with that summary. The summary becomes the new "base" for future turns. When the window approaches capacity, it compacts, replacing the full history with a structured summary.

> The key distinction from pruning (Strategy 4): summarization condenses all content into a shorter form. Pruning removes only the irrelevant content. Use summarization when all the history is broadly relevant but verbose. Use pruning when some parts are clearly irrelevant.

Reviewer: Add this maybe in strategy 4 section rather then here.

> ⚠️ **Warning: Information Loss Risk**
>

> > Cognition and Manus warn that summarization must be done carefully to avoid losing critical information. Cognition uses a fine-tuned model specifically for this step to ensure key events are preserved. Manus actively discourages summarization and prefers context offloading (Strategy 5) instead, because offloading avoids the information loss problem entirely.

Reviewer: I dont think we need this reference to Cognition or Manus here. Since we are intrducing the topic as a reference guide, good enough to call out the risk an add links to external sources for greater deep dives from the reader.

>
> If you use summarization, treat the compaction model as a first-class component that needs its own evaluation and prompt engineering.

| Advantages | Limitations |
| --- | --- |
| ✅ Preserves compressed form of all history | ❌ Risk of information loss , fine-tune or carefully prompt the compaction model |
| ✅ Agent sees a coherent narrative, not an abrupt cutoff | ❌ Adds latency and cost at compaction time |

> | ✅ Works well for long-running conversational agents | ❌ Manus recommends offloading over summarization for tool-heavy agents |

Reviewer: Same here about Manus

---

### Strategy 3 — Dynamic Tool Selection

**Failure mode addressed:** Context Confusion

> Every tool definition you bind to the LLM consumes tokens and introduces potential confusion. Research from the RAG-MCP paper found that above 30 tools with overlapping descriptions, tool selection accuracy degrades sharply; above 100 tools, failure is near-certain. The "Less is More" paper showed Llama 3.1 8B fails a benchmark with 46 tools but succeeds with 19.

Reviewer: Add citations or links to these papers.

> The solution: embed all tool descriptions in a vector store and retrieve only the semantically relevant tools at each LLM call. The RAG-MCP team found this yielded up to 3x improvement in tool selection accuracy.

Reviewer: Link out to Tool RAG recipe here.

| Advantages | Limitations |
| --- | --- |
| ✅ Agent remains aware of its own notes without bloating the message list | ❌ Requires the agent to use the write tool, prompt engineering is essential |
| ✅ Rewriting the plan (Manus pattern) keeps the agent on track for long tasks | ❌ Scratchpad is within-session only (see Strategy 6 for cross-session persistence) |
| ✅ Avoids information loss unlike summarization, the agent chooses what to keep | ❌ Poor agent instruction can result in under-used scratchpad |

---

### Strategy 6 — Filesystem as Scratchpad

**Failure modes addressed:** Context Distraction, Context Clash

When tasks are long enough to exceed even a well-managed context window, the filesystem becomes the memory system. The agent writes plans, intermediate results, and findings to files; reads them back selectively; and uses `grep` or search to locate specific information without loading entire files.

This is the approach taken by the Anthropic multi-agent research system for tasks that could exceed 200,000 tokens. Manus uses this as their preferred alternative to summarization avoiding the information loss risk entirely.

> | Advantages | Limitations |

Reviewer: Mention security concerns of read/write access

| ✅ Preferred by Manus over summarization for tool-heavy agents | |

---

### Strategy 7 — Semantic Compression

**Failure modes addressed:** Context Distraction, Context Confusion

Semantic compression goes further than summarization. Rather than summarizing conversation turns, it identifies the minimal set of concepts and facts that must be preserved for future reasoning, and encodes them in a structured, compact form, sometimes as structured JSON, sometimes as a knowledge graph, sometimes as condensed prose with explicit preservation rules.

Cognition (Devin) uses a fine-tuned model for this step, trained specifically to preserve the events and facts that matter for software engineering tasks.

| Advantages | Limitations |
| --- | --- |
| ✅ Preserves semantically important information even under aggressive compression | ❌ No standard LangChain abstraction : must build from scratch |
| ✅ Can be tuned per domain (coding, research, customer service) | ❌ Requires careful prompt engineering or fine-tuning per domain |
| ✅ Produces a structured, inspectable summary | ❌ Hardest to evaluate, information loss may be subtle |

---

> ### Strategy 8 — RAG / Vector Retrieval

Reviewer: Mention how this coupled with FIFO, can in a way offer a way to do Scratchpad strategy.

> ⚠️ **Coordination Warning:** Constrain subagents to *information gathering*, not decision making. Let a single agent do all the synthesis and writing at the end. If the subtasks must be tightly coordinated to produce a coherent whole, keep them in a single agent.

| Advantages | Limitations |
| --- | --- |
| ✅ Prevents Context Clash between independent research threads | ❌ High orchestration complexity |
| ✅ Massive effective context window (N subagents × model context) | ❌ Tightly coupled tasks will produce contradictions |
| ✅ Each subagent can have its own specialized tool loadout and prompt | ❌ Coordination overhead adds latency |
| ✅ Anthropic: 90.2% improvement over single-agent on research benchmarks | ❌ Debugging multi-agent traces is significantly harder |

---

## 5. Deployment Considerations

### Strategy Stack by Scenario

> | Scenario | Recommended Stack |

Reviewer: Add some commentary before the table saying in our opinion, Context management is always use case specific. Based on your usecase, a different approach maybe more suitable.

| --- | --- |
| Short conversational agent (< 20 turns) | Strategy 1 Rolling Window |
| Long-running chatbot (100+ turns) | Strategy 2 (Compaction) + Strategy 5 (Note-Taking) |
| Tool-heavy research agent | Strategy 4 (Pruning) + Strategy 5 (Note-Taking) + Strategy 6 (Filesystem) |
| Agent with large tool registry (30+ tools) | Strategy 3 (Dynamic Tool Selection) |
| Knowledge-intensive Q&A agent | Strategy 8 (RAG) + Strategy 4 (Pruning) |
| Parallel research / breadth-first tasks | Strategy 9 (Sub-agents) information gathering only |
| Long-running multi-session agent | Strategy 6 (Filesystem) + persistent Store |

> > When evaluating your agent's context management, do not rely solely on Needle-in-a-Haystack (NIAH) benchmarks. NIAH measures a narrow capability `lexical retrieval` but models that score near-perfectly on NIAH can still degrade badly on semantic reasoning tasks as context grows. Build evaluation sets that reflect your actual task distribution, include distractor content, and test at context lengths beyond your expected operating range.

Reviewer: This is not needed I think.
